--- 
title: Progress OpenEdge ABL Language and DBMS Considered Harmful
author: Abe Voelker
created_at: 2010-08-21
updated_at: 2010-10-02
published: false
---

I won't go into any detail about how I got the job I currently have programming
in Progress OpenEdge ABL, but suffice to say I knew I was in deep trouble from
the start when most of the documents about the Progress language I read when
learning the language were more focused on "business logic" and how the language
makes things "easy" on the programmer rather than displaying the language's real
raw technical strengths.  I couldn't help but be reminded of the software
industry mentality I've read about from the mid-late '80s and early '90s when
important software design decisions (like programming languages to develop in)
were chosen by managers who knew nothing about programming but bought into all
the <em>sales speak</em> that these documents were oozing.

The cold chill down my spine that I initially felt upon glancing at the language
documents has since turned into a fiery rage that burns with the passion of a
million suns after having learned it.  I have done my best to make do with the
language's limitations, and I believe I have pushed it to about as far as it can
go without directly linking into external .NET libraries.

In addition, I am well aware of the
<a href="http://meyerweb.com/eric/comment/chech.html">negative opinions some
have</a> of the "considered harmful" type of essay.  I initially tried to think
of some positive attributes of the Progress OpenEdge ABL language and DBMS to
include in order to make this a balanced "positives vs. negatives" essay, but I
honestly couldn't think of any.  I see no reason for a business that needs data
management and reporting to use OpenEdge ABL over any of the well-known (and
free) programming languages (such as Java or C++) and database management
systems (such as MySQL) in the year 2010.  The power of all the external
libraries that exist in these languages simply makes it a no-brainer, and the
ability to drop down into something lower-level and more powerful means that you
are not constrained by a domain-specific language like with OpenEdge ABL.

The way I see it, from a purely cost vs. benefit viewpoint, is the language is
cheap due to the ease of writing simple queries and basic report creation, but
expensive due to the high licensing cost of the software, the low tolerance for
any advanced capabilities (i.e. anything other than simple queries and report
creation), and the future high cost of maintaining software that was poorly
designed from the start, due mostly to the limitations of the language inhibiting
code reuse and any sort of design but also because of the caliber of programmer
that typically creates the code (nothing against ABL programmers, but why hire a
B.S. to do querying and report creation?).

Therefore, from this cost vs. benefit viewpoint, the only type of business that
would benefit from Progress OpenEdge ABL is one that will need <strong>a system
designed by a non-programmer</strong> for a business with <strong>a lot of start
up money</strong> and that is <strong>not expected to survive in the long-term
</strong>.  Some examples I've come up with that seem to fit this criteria are
the 1990s' "dot-com bubble" flash in the pan IT companies that rapidly died out
over 10 years ago (which would interestingly explain some of Progress' success),
or drug dealing operations that need a quick way to manage their data and invoices.

I am aware that Progress (later Progress 4GL, now OpenEdge ABL) was really
created as a <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain-specific_language">
domain-specific language</a> to make business data management and reporting
simple, and that a lot of the criticism below is harsh when comparing it to a
"real" programming language.  However, the fact that Progress corporation marketed
it as a 4GL wizz-bang language that could do it all instead of the DSL that it
really is, means that it is exempt from such consideration (they preferred to
knock down the "3GL" languages I am contrasting it with below as being less
capable!).  This is especially true considering that any businesses that bought
into this hype and managed to become successful are now stuck with an antiquated,
closed language and database management system, making it impossible to keep up
with the latest advances in technology unless Progress corporation enhances the
language to add features that are not bolted in to the system (which, of course,
costs money to upgrade to version <code>n+1</code>).

So, without further ado is a list (in no particular order) of grievances that I
have with the language and database system that I hope will provide reasons for
anyone considering using Progress OpenEdge ABL to <em><strong>reconsider!
</strong></em>

<hr />

### DBMS: No inherent concept of inter-table relationships (i.e. foreign key).

I really can't understate how huge of a weakness I believe this is for a modern
relational database - I would go as far as saying you cannot consider Progress
a modern relational database for this reason.  Consequently, this has major
repercussions for the ABL language, whose strength is its simple integration
with database access, because even though doing simple queries is relatively
easy, the "root of the tree" so to speak is rotten, which kind of makes the
fact that you can easily get to the branches a moot point.

For a database administrator trying to maintain meta information about a very
large database with thousands of tables becomes a Herculean task, because
there is no help from the database internally.  Any table relationship
information must be stored and maintained externally from the database, which
adds overhead and increases the possibility of creating faulty information.

I will mention that in the ABL language there <em>is</em> a querying shortcut,
however, where if you use identical field names (and at least one unique
index) in differing tables you can do

<pre class="highlight"><code class="language-openedge">FOR EACH order-line OF order</code></pre>

However, <span style="text-decoration: underline;">do not mistake this for an
underlying concept of inter-table relationships</span>.  This is nothing more
than syntactic sugar for doing simple table joins.


### ABL: Division of integers isn't "integer division" (it rounds up!).
Example:

<pre class="highlight"><code class="language-openedge">DEF VAR i AS INT NO-UNDO.
i = 1 / 2.
MESSAGE i. /* Displays '1'! */</code></pre>

Apparently, all types of division are implicitly done as `DECIMAL`, even if you
are dividing two `INTEGER` datatypes and storing the result in another
`INTEGER`.  Therefore, in the example above, the division of 1/2 results in a
`DECIMAL` value of 0.5, which, when assigned to the `INTEGER` datatype, is
rounded up to 1 (!).  The workaround is to do this:

<pre class="highlight"><code class="language-openedge">
TRUNCATE(1 / 2, 0). /* Force integer division (returns '0') */
</code></pre>

### ABL: Arrays are 1-based rather than 0-based.
I think <a href="http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/EWD/transcriptions/EWD08xx/EWD831.html">
Edsgar Dijkstra explained it best</a> why this is counter-productive.


### ABL: Inability to declare a variable as constant.

Using preprocessor directives in many cases can achieve the same result, however,
experience from industry long ago has shown the preprocessor method tends to be
more error-prone (similar to the citation Dijkstra uses in the above 1-based vs
0-based array link).  See <a href="http://www.oualline.com/books.free/style/c06.html#pgfId=239">
<span style="text-decoration: underline;">C Elements of Style</span>, chapter 6</a>
for some examples.

I would also add that it also makes enumerations in object-oriented languages
much better, because a defined constant obeys scoping rules.  For example, you
can create a class called `Color` and define the color `RED` as an integer
enumeration equal to `0xFF0000`; if you define the color `RED` as a public
constant you can then have other classes refer to it like so: `Color::RED`, and
they will simply get the value `0xFF0000`.  Pretty slick!

<span class="label notice">Update 2010-10-02</span> Just wanted to point out that
the above Enum example can be achieved like so:

<pre class="highlight"><code class="language-openedge">
CLASS Color:
    DEFINE PUBLIC STATIC PROPERTY RED AS INTEGER INITIAL 16711680 NO-UNDO
      GET.
      PRIVATE SET.
END CLASS.
</code></pre>

I recently used a similar method for the
<a href="http://github.com/abevoelker/OpenEdge-ABL-Stomp-Client">Stomp client
framework</a>.  I am still hoping for a <code>const</code> keyword for more
general language use, though.


### ABL: Primitive variables are not very <em>primitive</em>.

<em>My</em> definition of primitive here is a
<a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Value_type">value type</a> datatype built
into the language whose behavior cannot be extended by a program and the size
of which is expected to be a fixed size at compile-time, e.g. `INTEGER` or
`LOGICAL`.  I don't really think of `LONGCHAR` as a primitive type.  According
to ProKB #P144589 (my emphasis added):

<blockquote>As for data, such as CHARACTER, LONGCHAR, etc <em><strong>variables
and parameters of any kind</strong></em>, we do not pre-allocate memory for
them, except for the 'coordinates' of the variable or the parameter.
...
The actual data itself is all variable length, whether in memory or in a
record.</blockquote>

To me, that means that the actual stack memory allocated for variables are
<strong>always</strong> pointers to variable-length heap memory.  I can't help
but think that this can have serious performance issues due to the efficiency
differences between stack and heap memory.

I also do not like the fact that anything (even "primitives") can be assigned
a value of `?`, which most ABL programmers who come from other language
backgrounds approximate to be ABL's `NULL` pointer value. This leads to weird
things like how a `LOGICAL` (ABL's boolean datatype) is actually not boolean 
but tertiary - it can have the values `TRUE`, `FALSE`, or `?`. This is actually
how message boxes with "Yes" "No" and "Cancel" buttons in OpenEdge ABL work -
the "Cancel" button assigns the `LOGICAL` variable to `?`.

### ABL: Un-optimized language compiler.

When I had to learn Progress for my job, I had been taught from an old manual
that stated that when `ASSIGN`ing to multiple variables sequentially, it is
more efficient to group the assignments into a single `ASSIGN` statement, e.g.

<pre class="highlight"><code class="language-openedge">
ASSIGN i = 0
       j = 1.
</code></pre>

is supposedly more efficient than

<pre class="highlight"><code class="language-openedge">
ASSIGN i = 0.
ASSIGN j = 1.
</code></pre>

I recently was looking at the 10.1C documentation and was surprised to find
that that information is still in there.  I found it hard to believe this is
still an issue, so I even did a test compile in 10.1C and sure enough, the
resulting object code was larger for the two-<code>ASSIGN</code> statement
scenario.

Such a simple thing as this should have been optimized away a long time ago by
the compiler.  The fact that the compiler cannot handle such a simple
optimization leads me to believe that very little is being optimized by it at
all.  This leads to developers always having a faint voice in the back of their
head saying "Will this compile into optimal object code?" which takes away time
and effort from the development process.

<strong>This is one of those things that was an issue at least 10 or 15 years
ago for programmers who code in modern languages.</strong> The fact that I even
have to think about this in the year 2010, quite frankly, is a testament to how
antiquated this language is and sends a message that Progress corporation has
little interest in modernizing its core.  I hope that that doesn't come across
as being too incendiary, but it is one of the issues that I feel very strongly
about.

Just for the heck of it, I also checked to see if the compiler could handle a
somewhat more complex optimization - converting
<a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tail_recursion">tail recursive</a> calls
into iterative:

<pre class="highlight"><code class="language-openedge">
PROCEDURE tailcall:
    DEFINE INPUT PARAMETER ipiNum AS INTEGER NO-UNDO.
    IF ipiNum EQ 99999 THEN
      RETURN.
    ELSE
      RUN tailcall(INPUT ipiNum + 1).
END PROCEDURE.
RUN tailcall(INPUT 1).
</code></pre>

On success, nothing should happen; on failure, the call stack will overflow
(assuming 99999 procedure calls is enough to overflow the call stack).

The result: of course, the stack went "boom".

### ABL+DBMS: Un-optimized query compiler resultsets.
A while ago, I had found an interesting scenario where I had a query that
looked like this:

<pre class="highlight"><code class="language-openedge">
FOR EACH table
  WHERE table.field1 EQ "foo"
  AND   (table.field2 EQ "bar" OR table.field2 EQ "baz")
</code></pre>

that was strangely running slow.  I was using an index, and the XREF did show
that it was using the expected index.  I changed the query to look like this:

<pre class="highlight"><code class="language-openedge">
FOR EACH table
  WHERE (table.field1 EQ "foo" AND table.field2 EQ "bar")
     OR (table.field1 EQ "foo" AND table.field2 EQ "baz")
</code></pre>

And presto, the query ran much, much faster, even though mathematically the
two different syntaxes are identical (the XREF listing they produced was
identical, showing they were both using the correct index).  I did spend a
little bit of time looking at Progress' knowledgebase, and supposedly certain
phrasings can cause the resultset (how the DBMS returns results to the client
session) to be broken up differently which is probably the cause of the problem.

However, like the above compiler complaint, this is the year 2010 and not
something the programmer should have to worry about, especially given the
simplicity of the above example and the marketing of Progress ABL as being a
database querying powerhouse (the above example should rather be an example of
how well the language performs in such a scenario).  If I were doing 15 table
joins I would cut it some slack.

<span class="label notice">Update 2010-10-02</span> After getting some feedback
on the issue, I decided to
<a href="http://www.abevoelker.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2010/08/indexes.txt">
look up the indexes</a> for the table that reference either field1 or field2.
To me, it still proves that the query compiler is stupid since you would think
it would have chosen index4.  Perhaps someone can elaborate on why it wouldn't?

### ABL: Limited multiprogramming capabilities.

There is no support for forking or threading processes, which allow a much more
lightweight approach (by keeping process access in a single-user context) than
sockets, which is the only method that ABL allows.  Granted, the typical
Progress ABL application probably will not have a use for this for things like
number crunching.  However, forking/threading really shine in networking
applications, which can certainly arise in a data-driven environment like
Progress, where interaction with non-Progress databases may become important.  I
won't get into fine-grained details for those who have never written a network
application, but the ability to have a process to handle incoming requests that
forks or threads a new process for each request is much simpler (and entirely
different) to deal with than a socket-based approach.  Not to mention, the
number of sockets that can be opened is kernel-limited, which I think is
generally around 65,536 (if memory serves).

I do remember reading about a library some people were working on to try and
simulate threads using sockets, which is definitely a valiant effort, but I just
don't think you can achieve the same simplicity (and certainly nowhere near the
same performance without raw language support to hook into the kernel) as a fork
or thread-based approach.

### ABL: Lack of useful operators.

<a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operators_in_C_and_C%2B%2B">Modern languages
have operators</a> such as `++`, `--`, `+=`,
`-=`, `*=`, `/=`, `%=`, etc, which
allows for things like `i++` as a shortcut for `i = i + 1`
or `i += 7` as a shortcut for `i = i + 7` or
`cMyString += "foo bar baz"` instead of `cMyString = cMyString +
"foo bar baz"`.

This can get <em>really annoying</em> when your standards dictate using the
`ASSIGN` statement, e.g.

<pre class="highlight"><code class="language-openedge">
ASSIGN cMyString = cMyString + "foo bar baz".
</code></pre>

instead of

<pre class="highlight"><code class="language-openedge">
cMyString += "foo bar baz".
</code></pre>

### ABL: Lack of <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bitwise_operation">bitwise operators and bit-shifting capability.

A couple months ago I had to
implement an object's hashcode; I had planned on hashing a few distinct private
variables and then combining each hashcode together using either a bitwise-and
or an exclusive-or, e.g.

<code>hashcode(obj) = hashcode(obj.var1) ^ hashcode(obj.var2) ^
hashcode(obj.var3)</code>

Since Progress doesn't support it, however, I had to do something really
boneheaded, like

<code>hashcode(string(hashcode(obj.var1)) + string(hashcode(obj.var2)) +
string(hashcode(obj.var3)))</code>

If it was something important, I probably would have worked out something more
robust, but it got the job done.

Also, although not relevant anymore (due to pipelined processor architectures;
thanks Wikipedia), you can't do fun things like a <a
href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XOR_swap_algorithm">XOR swap</a> (where you
don't need to allocate a temporary variable for swapping primitives).</li> <li>
<strong>ABL: Inconsistent error handling.</strong> Some errors use global
<code>ERROR-STATUS</code> handle (trip <code>ERROR</code> and push error
message(s) to <code>GET-MESSAGE</code>), some methods return a logical and put
error message into <code>ERROR-STATUS</code> error queue (retrieved with
<code>GET-MESSAGE</code>), some return a logical but don't put error message
into <code>GET-MESSAGE</code> (these are the worst - they push error messages to
stderr and if you don't do this: [code lang="ABL"]ASSIGN lSuppressError =
methodThrowsError("Foo") NO-ERROR.[/code] then these will be visible to the
user!).  </li> <li> <strong>ABL: <code>MODULO</code> using negative left-hand
operator is undefined behavior.</strong> This one is somewhat nit-picky, but it
really bit me one time and was annoying because no runtime warning was produced
- it simply returned weird results.  After checking the documentation, it turns
out that there is a note "The expression must be greater than 0 for MODULO to
return a correct value".

It just seems very silly to me, because modulus is such a simple operation.  It
would be very easy to write a wrapper class around this that checks the
left-hand operator, does a "positive" modulus if the operator is negative, and
then re-applies the negativity after the operation.  This really needs to be
fixed and should have been a long time ago.  </li> <li> <strong>ABL: No native
multi-dimensional arrays, e.g. <code>INTEGER[][]</code> or
<code>INTEGER[][][]</code>.</strong> This mostly disappointed me because the
language used to be written in C and it would seem like an obvious thing to
inherit.  This isn't the end of the world, though, because the language does
support <code>TEMP-TABLE</code>s, and a similar construct can be created like
so: [code lang="ABL"]DEFINE TEMP-TABLE ttThreeDimensionalArray NO-UNDO FIELD iX
AS INTEGER FIELD iY AS INTEGER FIELD iZ AS INTEGER FIELD cData AS CHARACTER
INDEX IXPK_XYZ iX iY iZ.[/code] However, there is a reason that in C++ or Java
one does not always use a <code>Vector</code> or <code>ArrayList</code>: there
is more overhead because of the way the dynamic memory allocation works and the
extra work that goes on behind the scenes to maintain it.  Sometimes you just
want a simple chunk of (preferably stack) memory with no overhead.

The good news is that the work ABL was created for very rarely needs such
performance considerations.  </li> <li> <strong>ABL: <code>TEMP-TABLE</code>s
(and <code>WORKFILE</code>s) do not support certain datatypes, such as
<code>LONGCHAR</code> or <code>MEMPTR</code>.</strong> See Progress Error 11406:
"Temp-tables and workfiles do not support the LONGCHAR data type." <br /> Also
Progress Error 3347: "You can define and access a MEMPTR data type only through
program variables."

This would have been useful for me in at least one case, where I wanted to store
a <code>TEMP-TABLE</code> that contained a <code>CHARACTER</code> that
represented a file name and a <code>LONGCHAR</code> that contained the file
contents loaded into memory.  The annoying workaround I use is to wrap these
datatypes in an Object: [code lang="ABL"]
 /*------------------------------------------------------------------------
    File        : LongcharWrapper.cls
    Purpose     : Wraps a LONGCHAR variable in an Object
    Description : Used in situations where you need to store a LONGCHAR but
                  Progress can't seem to handle it (e.g. in a temp-table)
    Author(s)   : Abe Voelker
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------*/

USING Progress.Lang.*.

CLASS LongcharWrapper USE-WIDGET-POOL:

	DEFINE PRIVATE VARIABLE lc AS LONGCHAR NO-UNDO.

    CONSTRUCTOR PUBLIC LongcharWrapper():
		SUPER ().
	END CONSTRUCTOR.
	
	CONSTRUCTOR PUBLIC LongcharWrapper(INPUT iplc AS LONGCHAR):
		SUPER ().
		ASSIGN lc = iplc.
	END CONSTRUCTOR.
	
	METHOD PUBLIC LONGCHAR getLongchar():
	    RETURN lc.
	END METHOD.
	
	METHOD PUBLIC VOID setLongchar(INPUT iplc AS LONGCHAR):
	    ASSIGN lc = iplc.
	END METHOD.

END CLASS.
[/code]
</li>
<li>
<strong>ABL: Poor Unix batch mode error handling. (Added 2010-08-31)</strong>
There are a couple issues that I have with ABL's batch mode error handling when
being ran from Unix.  The first is that the return code for some programs that
should be "error" actually returns "success".  For example, if I run the
following OpenEdge ABL code (which clearly produces an infinite loop that runs
out of stack memory):
[code lang="ABL"]ROUTINE-LEVEL ON ERROR UNDO, THROW.
RUN p.

PROCEDURE p:
 RUN p.
END PROCEDURE.[/code]
using the following shell script:
[code lang="bash"]#!/usr/bin/ksh
umask 000

if (mpro -b -p stackboom.p > stdout.txt 2> stderr.txt)
then
  echo "success"
else
  echo "fail"
fi[/code]
will echo <code>success</code> to the shell, even though the output stream is filled with error messages:
<pre>WARNING: -nb exceeded. Automatically increasing from 90 to 122. (5407)
WARNING: -nb exceeded. Automatically increasing from 122 to 154. (5407)
WARNING: -nb exceeded. Automatically increasing from 154 to 186. (5407)
WARNING: -nb exceeded. Automatically increasing from 186 to 218. (5407)
SYSTEM ERROR: -s exceeded. Raising STOP condition and attempting to write stack trace to file 'procore'. Consider increasing -s startup parameter. (5635)</pre>

The second issue I have is that batch mode ABL programs do not write error
output to <code>stderr</code>.  Everything goes to <code>stdout</code>.  I had
initially assumed that any Progress error would go to <code>stderr</code>, so I
tested this using the following code: [code lang="ABL"]ROUTINE-LEVEL ON ERROR
UNDO, THROW.  UNDO, THROW NEW Progress.Lang.AppError("FooError", 1337).[/code]
which did produce output, however, the output went to <code>stdout</code>.  Upon
further investigation, it turns out that all error messages that are produced
(even system errors) go to <code>stdout</code>.  My guess would be it's another
feature of Progress that tries to oversimplify things in an ill-guided attempt
to make it "easier" on the programmer.  Unfortunately, this type of thing leads
to poor program design, which leads to exponential future maintenance cost.
</li> <li> <strong>OOABL: Objects are unexpectedly large and their size cannot
be easily pre-determined.</strong>

I have hit memory allocation of over 1GiB just by creating a couple dozen
objects with small text files (total appended size not greater than 1MiB) loaded
into memory as <code>LONGCHAR</code>s.  This is a big issue because loading a
text file into a <code>LONGCHAR</code> is about the only way to load a file into
memory, short of doing a lot of unnecessary work with <code>MEMPTR</code>s.  I
don't know what else to say other than there is just way too much memory
allocated in the above scenario; I'm not sure if this is strictly to do with the
<code>LONGCHAR</code> datatype or if it is an object-oriented ABL issue.

Dealing with memory in general in object-oriented ABL is annoying because there
is no fine-grained control of the amount of memory to be initialized, nor is
there any way to tell how much memory a class instance will take up when
initialized after completing the class structure (.cls file).  In C++ the
<code>sizeof</code> operator provides this functionality; in Java it is not so
simple, but there is a package that offers the needed functionality -
<code>java.lang.instrument.Instrumentation</code>.

The way I have been measuring object size is to start up a session, record the
starting process memory allocation, run a small program that initializes a large
number of the objects to be measured - say 10,000 or so - and subtract the
starting memory allocation size from the current size (divided by 10,000 of
course).  This is far from an accurate estimate, but it can give a ballpark
figure for the size of an object.

From my own estimates, an Object with only a <code>CHARACTER</code> variable
(and no non-inherited methods) appears to require approximately <strong>21.6
KiB</strong>!  This is much higher than I would have ever expected; it makes me
think of a <code>CHARACTER</code> variable more as allocation for a medium sized
text file than as a replacement for a 'string' datatype like C++/Java offer, of
which I think most programmers expect the allocation to typically be for a
paragraph of text or less.  </li> <li> <del><strong>OOABL: Manual memory
management; no garbage collection.</strong> This is from the "Getting Started:
Object-oriented Programming: Getting Started with Classes, Interfaces, and
Objects" manual, subsection "Managing the object life-cycle" (my emphasis
added):</del>


<blockquote>    <strong>You are responsible for the lifetime of a class
instance. You must delete the object when it is no longer needed.</strong> If
the variable used to hold the object reference obtained from the
<code>NEW</code> phrase goes out of scope and the object has not been deleted,
the object remains in memory even though there is no reference to the object.
This <strong>can lead to a potential memory leak</strong>, as it can with any
other dynamically created objects in ABL. 

    Therefore, as long as you need the object, you must also ensure that you
    maintain an object reference to that object. You can always assign the
    object reference to another variable before it goes out of scope or pass it
    to another procedure, where you can continue to manage the object until you
    finally delete it. 

    Deleting a class instance 

    To avoid memory leaks during the execution of the application, you must
    delete an instantiated object when it is no longer needed. To delete a class
    instance, you must use the <code>DELETE OBJECT</code>
    statement.</blockquote>

<del datetime="2010-08-23T19:24:40+00:00">I do not understand this reasoning in
the slightest; words cannot express how vehemently I loathe this whole concept.
The fact that OpenEdge ABL does not give you fine-grained control of memory
allocation is understandable because it is a domain-specific language that tries
to make things simple for the programmer.  However, to then go on and expect
programmers to always have to free their own memory (otherwise creating memory
leaks) is plain stupidity.  This is simply the worst case scenario of memory
allocation that mixes the weaknesses of Java and C/C++'s different memory
allocation methodologies.</del> <strong><em>Update: This was implemented in
OpenEdge 10.2A</em></strong> </li> <li> <del
datetime="2010-08-23T19:24:40+00:00"><strong>OOABL: No support for
<code>ABSTRACT</code> methods or classes.</strong> Interfaces are nice, but
sometimes I want to implement <em>some</em> behavior in the superclass and stub
out <em>some</em> behavior for the subclass to implement!  This also makes
implementing some design patterns, such as the <a
href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template_method_pattern">Template Method
pattern</a>, impossible.  This is a very serious problem for those trying to
make well-structured object-oriented code!</del> <strong><em>Update: This was
implemented in OpenEdge 10.2B</em></strong> </li> <li> <strong>OOABL: No support
for interface inheritance (subinterfaces).</strong> <p>There is no doubt that
ABL copied most of Java's methodology of doing object orientation.  Java made
the design decision to not support multiple inheritance like C++.  Instead,
similar functionality can be obtained by inheriting from multiple interfaces.
In addition, in Java it is possible to make an interface inherit from another
interface, which can lead to better design (for a real world example, see how
java.util.Collection extends java.lang.Iterable).  ABL does not allow the latter
functionality.  You cannot have an interface extend another interface.  For an
example, try to compile this code:</p> [code lang="abl"]INTERFACE bar: END
INTERFACE.  INTERFACE foo EXTENDS bar.[/code] <p>You will get a Progress error:
<code>Inheritance is not supported for interfaces. (13046)</code> which will
stop you dead in your tracks.</p> <p>Supposedly, this feature is planned for
OpenEdge 11.  So, like usual, you need to pay more money to upgrade when your
application evolves enough to require any advanced features.</p> </li> <li>
<strong>OOABL: Cannot use sockets within a windowed environment.</strong> The
problem is that you cannot handle socket reads internally to a class; you must
spawn an external persistent procedure to handle them.  To then be able to
actually read the data from the socket, you must do some type of input blocking
in the class, such as <code>WAIT-FOR READ-RESPONSE OF hSocket</code>.  If you
execute that line within a windowed environment, you will get Progress error
2780.  Batch mode processes work fine, however.  </li> <li> <strong>OOABL:
<code>WAIT-FOR</code> statements fail inside of methods that do not return
<code>VOID</code>.</strong> This is annoying when you are dealing with sockets.
The workaround is to put the <code>WAIT-FOR</code> statement inside its own
method that returns <code>VOID</code>, then call that <code>METHOD</code>.  If
the workaround is so simple, I'm not sure why the error needs to be thrown in
the first place.  See Progress error 5622 for more info.  </li> <li>
<strong>OOABL: Cannot define a <code>TEMP-TABLE</code> inside of a
<code>METHOD</code>.</strong> The workaround for this is to put the
<code>TEMP-TABLE</code> definition in the main class definition when possible.
However, this will expand the memory size of the object, and is not always a
plausible solution in general.  For instance, I had a situation where I needed
my <code>METHOD</code> to make recursive calls to itself, which meant that I
really needed a <code>TEMP-TABLE</code> that was scoped to each
<code>METHOD</code> call's block.  Otherwise, each recursive call overrides the
class global <code>TEMP-TABLE</code>!  I had to re-do the algorithm iteratively
just because of this weakness.

<strong><em>UPDATE 2010-10-02: Brad Williams pointed out another workaround -
use a dynamic <code>TEMP-TABLE</code>.</em></strong>  This will, of course,
introduce run-time inefficiencies since the <code>TEMP-TABLE</code> definition
will not be considered until it is needed (no pre-compiling), and also the
developer must be sure to clean up after him/herself or a memory leak will be
created.  </li> <li> <strong>OOABL: <code>CATCH</code>/<code>THROW</code> is not
well-implemented.</strong> It does not work as one familiar with the paradigm
would expect.  No way to <code>THROW</code> an error from a class and enforce
caller <code>CATCH</code>ing it (in fact there is no <code>TRY</code> statement
at all...), which is a <strong><em>big deal</em></strong>.  It would have been
nice if they used different keywords entirely, because it isn't nearly as useful
as Java or C++'s implementations.  </li> <li> <strong>OOABL: <code>PUBLIC</code>
methods cannot access <code>PRIVATE</code> variables or methods using an object
reference.</strong> This one comes up a lot when I am writing a getter or setter
for a class.  For instance, if I had a class called Foo, with a private Baz
object variable named <code>objBaz</code> and I wrote a getter like the
following to provide a means to publicly access the Baz: [code lang="ABL"]METHOD
PUBLIC Foo getBaz(): RETURN THIS-OBJECT:objBaz.  END METHOD.[/code] I will get a
compiler error - "Cannot reference private member "objBaz" off of an object
reference.".  The problem seems to be the <code>THIS-OBJECT</code> reference,
and the (silly) solution is to remove it: [code lang="ABL"]METHOD PUBLIC Foo
getBaz(): RETURN objBaz.  END METHOD.[/code] compiles fine.  However, I am in
the habit of being explicit, so it annoys me that I cannot do it the first way.
This second method also introduces a potential "gotcha" in the case of
implementing a setter: [code lang="ABL"]CLASS BadSetter: DEFINE PRIVATE VARIABLE
cMyChar AS CHAR NO-UNDO.
    
    CONSTRUCTOR PUBLIC BadSetter(): SUPER().  END CONSTRUCTOR.
    
    METHOD PUBLIC CHARACTER setChar(INPUT cMyChar AS CHAR): ASSIGN cMyChar  =
    cMyChar .  END METHOD.
    
    METHOD PUBLIC CHARACTER getChar(): RETURN cMyChar.  END METHOD.  END
    CLASS.[/code] This might seem like an obvious mistake in the
    <code>setChar</code> method, but if you are in a hurry and quickly stubbing
    code (especially mindless stuff like getters/setters) then it is an easy
    mistake to make.  It can potentially be annoying to find as well, since the
    ABL compiler has no problem assigning the <code>setChar</code> method
    block's local <code>cMyChar</code> variable's value to itself again.  The
    ability to change the left-hand operator to explicitly read
    <code>THIS-OBJECT:cMyChar</code> would solve the problem.

Another solution for the getter/setter-specific scenario is to use a
<code>PROPERTY</code> instead of a private variable and plain public
getter/setter methods.

<strong><em>UPDATE 2010-24-08: Found another example where this causes big
headaches - copy constructors! Example:</em></strong> [code lang="ABL"]CLASS
Foo: DEF PRIVATE VAR i AS INT NO-UNDO.  CONSTRUCTOR PUBLIC Foo(): END
CONSTRUCTOR.
  /* Copy constructor FAILS: */
  CONSTRUCTOR PUBLIC Foo(INPUT f AS Foo): i = f:i.  END CONSTRUCTOR.  END
  CLASS.[/code] </li> </ul>

<strong><em>UPDATE 2010-10-02: Brad Williams has provided an example using a
<code>PROPERTY</code> that fixes this:</strong></em> [code lang="ABL"] define
public property i as integer no-undo get.  private set.  [/code]

However, I still think an object should be able to self-reference its private
variables without needing to use a <code>PROPERTY</code>.

<hr />

<strong>Well, that's it for the list for now.  I will attempt to keep it
up-to-date by adding to and deleting from it as new issues are revealed to me
and old ones are fixed.  Feel free to comment, whether it be to rebut, add to
the list, commiserate, or otherwise!</strong>
